And
set
to
and now we are live.
You will also be on our website.
So.
Ok.
All right.
So I think um we'll continue to monitor um the waiting room so that if anyone is um
waiting to get in, you can see us. So let's take a moment just to welcome you.
Um We are really excited about today's um presentation.
We have two fabulous speakers with us today that I will introduce in a moment.
Um We will be focusing on uh clinical trials somewhat but also um
background in psychiatry and also neuroscience.
Um So just to interview uh introduce everyone that is
here with us and those that helped put this together.
Of course, um It wouldn't be,
uh we wouldn't be here without Doctor Louise mclaughlin
who is um running the powerpoint presentation for us.
She's the executive director
of Dutchess County Workforce Investment Board.
So thank you for putting this together for as today.
We also have Mary Jane Bertram who is here as Regional Director
of the Hudson Valley Workforce Development Institute
and Lorraine
is here for as a workforce development liaison with Dutchess Community College.
So our two speakers today are Doctor Alex Bulletin who is here and um Angela Dow,
I hopefully I'm saying that correctly.
And um we will get
just reminding you the purpose of the zoom today is really to give you
an opportunity to learn more about these particular fields in the health sciences.
All of this information,
the video and the presentation will be posted as all the
others are on our website during out during the zoom.
As I've encouraged you already, please make sure that you have your video on.
Just make sure that you don't see a red slash through there.
And that will allow us to get to know you
just like if we have the opportunity to be in person
in addition to that, um
just uh be sure that you are listening so that
you have some great questions to share with us.
So um each of our speakers wanted the opportunity um to share a little bit about the
life of what they do, how they got into the profession um that they're in.
Um And if there's anything that they would change or
any advice that they could give you along the way.
So as you, um we always do in our presentations, we share with you
um some national averages and regional averages.
Um This one is a very broad average for scientists and
clinical researchers with the national average uh for the salary.
The big piece on this slide is to note the growth in this area
um of 11%. So that's always good to know
and I'm sure both of our speakers will be
talking about the schooling um that is required.
Um In addition to that, we also will be hearing from our research assistant
um who is a recent uh well, a graduate from Roy
Ketchum, but she'll be talking about the,
the extensive journey that she's been taking because it's a number
of years of experience to get where she is right now.
Um
In addition, we always talk about those um skills that each of the,
the health sciences look for.
So you can take a look through this once the presentation
is posted and um our speakers can definitely uh listen,
you
can listen for this as our speakers talk to you regarding the skills that they,
they feel are most important,
um particularly those listening skills
and then we will start by introducing it. So I make sure we're on the same page.
Um Doctor Alex Collison.
So again, if, if I went too quickly over these present uh slides,
you know that they will all be on the website.
So I'm pretty excited today to introduce to you, Doctor Alex Pool.
And um
he has a very long title.
Um He is a child and adolescent psychiatrist and um works
out of Mount Sinai in New York City through the icann um
Center
Fever Autism Institute. I think I messed the order of that up.
So I apologize because I wasn't reading it. I was doing it from memory.
Um, but, uh, Doctor Alex, who I finally called, Doctor Alex, um, uh, but Doctor Phil
is gonna share with you, how did he get into this field?
And, um, just some of the fabulous,
very interesting things that he gets to do in his role.
I'm gonna turn it over to you, Doctor Alex and thank you again for being here.
Thanks, Amy. It's really good to be here.
Maybe orient me a little bit. Who am I speaking to? Exactly.
I see some faces. I see a lot of grown up faces
but who else is like, generally speaking on the call?
You're muted,
you're muted.
Maybe you, you're muted.
Sorry, I was, I thought I clicked it and then I didn't.
Um, so these are our students ranging from seventh grade through 12th grade.
So, um, and, and also our, we have our adults that are here from,
from putting these together and Angela
who is also a speaker. So,
-- um, and several students might be popping
-- on as
well.
Seventh grade to 12th grade. Ok.
Yes.
And so you're, you're interested in sort of my trajectory?
What got me started
some advice. Yeah. Ok.
-- Um, so
-- I,
I'll definitely share your story that you shared
with me already about what your teacher had
told
-- you. Oh,
-- yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So that, that's actually, that was the very beginning of it all.
Um, so I mean, first, I'm, I'm a, I'm a physician.
I'm a psychiatrist and I specialize in child ana
in psychiatry.
I think, um,
you know, people always ask, you know,
when did you first realize you wanted to be
a child psychiatrist or a psychiatrist in general?
And, um,
I guess the answer for me was really in eighth grade
when a teacher of mine, this is like my very first mentor.
So that'll be, that'll be kind of my, my biggest piece of advice is to frankly grab a, a
mentor and somebody who's really invested in you and in your career.
So my, my English teacher who's also my homeroom teacher,
she gave me a book on Freud's interpretation of dreams. And she said, you know,
I really think you'd be a great psychiatrist.
It, you know, I hadn't spent even a moment
kind of considering what my career path would be
when I was in eighth grade.
I was, you know, focused on my friends and trying to get by in school and
I wasn't especially a good student. I was a decent student. But,
um that was really kind of a shock. My, my best friend's father as it turns out
was a psychiatrist
and also kind of odd. And I thought, wow, does that mean that I'm odd? And is that like,
but,
but, you know, it turns out you can be a psychiatrist and not be odd.
Um I don't think I was odd in the end. But
it really planted a very important seed
and it then revisited itself when I applied to college. And I was asked again,
what would my major be? You know? And I thought, hm,
I guess if I wanna be a psychiatrist, I should probably
major in preme
or do premedical classes.
So that's how I set out at the beginning of my college career.
I went to the University of Wisconsin.
And um I really had absolutely no concept of what was required in terms of
effort to be successful on a pre
med path.
And so very soon into my college career, I realized, gosh,
I can't have fun in college and,
and enjoy myself and take other kinds of classes and also, you know,
survive pre-med.
So I switched tracks and II, I became a psychology major instead.
And then I thought to myself, wow.
And I was gonna the next kind of point or I had to figure things out.
I was, I was practically a junior or senior
in college. And, and um
I had to think about what's my next steps.
I thought while I was a psychology major, I might as well
pursue
a graduate degree in psychology to be,
to be a clinical psychologist because I had already skipped over
all these pre-med classes that are required for medical school.
And I was sitting in interviews for first clinical psychology.
And I was asked the question, why do you want to be a clinical psychologist.
And it occurred to me in that moment, um, I,
I really didn't want to be a clinical psychologist.
I wanted to be a psychiatrist and a physician
and I, you know, and I,
and I tell these stories and these are actually very
true stories because I had no idea what I was doing
when I was in seventh grade or eighth grader, ninth grade or 10th grader.
Even when I was a senior in college, I had very little idea of what I was doing.
I had a sense of what my interests were.
I had a sense of what I thought I'd be good at
more importantly.
And it just kind of gave this little um beacon of, of direction, but
it wasn't as um kind of thought out.
I had an experience when I was a,
I think a freshman in college is a camp counselor
where I was a counselor in um,
a bump for kids with autism.
And that really fascinated me and I planted another seed and I thought to myself, oh,
wow.
So
psychology psychiatry,
maybe developmental disabilities. And that kind of
led me to this direction of working with Children
in psychiatry and developmental disabilities. And then,
and then you kind of get on a path and, and you decide, well,
if this is what I'm gonna do,
here's what it looks like. So it looks like
you gotta finish college,
you gotta go to medical school, then you gotta go to residency.
And if you wanna work with kids, you have to do a fellowship on top of your residency.
So I did um four years of college
and then, because I wasn't pre-med, I, I did so terribly in my pre-med classes,
I had to go back
for uh two years to collect all the pre-med
requirements, like chemistry and biology and physics. So
that's basically six years of college. Plus
what's, what's called post back then. Four years of medical school.
So,
what is that? That's 10,
then three years of adult psychiatry residency and two years of,
of child psychiatry fellowship.
So, my training was, was 15 years
and
I guess,
you know, from, from the perspective of the seventh or 12th grader that,
that feels like a very, very, very long time.
Um, but, but frankly, it's not
because when you think about it, you know, you, you practice
or you work for,
I don't know, I just, I just turned 50 last week.
What is that? I, I guess I, I finished when I was 30
all my schooling. So I've already been practicing for 20 years
and,
you know, I only 50 you know, presumably I have another 25 years perhaps to go.
So 15 years wouldn't be invested in like a career that's gonna be
4550 years. It's probably worth it.
Um,
I like to encourage people to go into medicine because I think that there's very,
very few careers out there where
you can have an impact on somebody every single day.
You can actually feel like, wow, your work is meaningful. You're helping people.
That's very gratifying.
I think it's, um,
you know, when you invest so much time and energy and, and frankly money into a path,
it, um, it feels like the investment really pays off.
I,
I think that psychiatry in particular is fascinating.
I think it's a really kind of developing field. I think
people who are interested in how the mind works.
Um
It never gets boring. There's always really fascinating stories.
There's always really
amazing experiences working with families,
there's always new things to learn, so you're constantly being challenged.
Um So III I think, you know, in that sense,
I would encourage people to consider medicine.
I'll say one more thing and I'm, I'm happy to take some questions.
So people I think are afraid of medicine because they feel like
I'm not good at math or I'm not good at science. And,
you know, I,
I think it may be that math and science aren't like your strengths necessarily.
But I think if you work really hard, you can, you can overcome
those things. I, I got a five credit DD
in chemistry in college,
you know, and, and I, I actually,
I advertised that because that failure taught me an enormous amount
about how to succeed and what it took.
And so I then went back
and I took another chemistry class and I got an a,
um, because I learned, you know, what, what, what,
what's required and it wasn't because I was good at chemistry.
I was actually pretty bad at chemistry
but you, you kind of figure it out over time.
Um, I was a terrible math student.
Um, in high school.
I was like in that,
at that point in eighth grade I was focused on like trying to pass math.
Um and I got an a in calculus, you know, at Columbia eventually. So,
you know what you decide right now in terms of
what your strengths are and how you kind of view things
may not necessarily be how you see things in five years or 10 years.
So don't, don't um
don't kind of predetermine your future
based on very small experiences and find mentors, find people that are gonna like,
inspire you and teach you and look out for you that's really important.
Excellent.
And um just like a, I know your day is so varied.
So I'm gonna say a day in your life,
but it's more like a month in your life because
you have so many different roles that you play.
Um
You, you know, obviously run clinical trials, you see patients.
Um Can you, can you try to describe how varied your day is?
And a lot of our students do ask, is there um
like a balance between family life and work life.
Yeah.
Um,
so, yeah, that, you know, balance is really important to achieve.
Um, I'm still trying to figure that balance thing out.
Um, I think what I like the most about my job is, is actually all the variety.
Um, I mean,
a day and a month are actually similar in some sense.
I mean, I, I came into the office this morning at
eight.
I, well, I, I was up earlier, I,
I had some balance in the sense that I went to exercise in the morning.
I took care of myself a little bit.
At eight, I was in the office, I saw a patient from 815 to 9,
from 9 to 930. I interviewed somebody for a job who wants to come onto our faculty.
From 930 to 10.
I,
I can't remember. I think it was an administrative meeting.
I do some administrative stuff.
Um
From 11 to 12, I sat in a lecture so I was able to kind of just learn some stuff.
It was like a grand rounds of sorts
from 12 to 1. I saw a patient who is actually participating in a clinical trial. So
at eight o'clock this morning, it was like a,
a patient who I'm just taking care of an ongoing care.
And then at noon,
I saw a patient who's being taken care of in the
context of a very strict protocol who is doing an experimental uh
treatment trial. Essentially from 1 to 130. I eat, like I have to eat periodically.
Otherwise I get very grumpy
and now I'm on a call with you guys so you can see the variety and it's really,
really cool and, and lots of fun.
And this afternoon
I have another extensive research evaluation.
Um, I have,
I'm sitting in on a conference call that's more academic and
then I have a couple of patients in the evening.
So I should be home by 730.
I would say
have dinner with my wife and kids.
I'll probably be asleep by 930
maybe 10.
I'll watch some TV, maybe I'll do a little reading. Yeah.
Um,
it is, it,
it you and we know how busy you are and that you
um are always being asked to uh participate in various studies and,
and clinical trials. Um So
I'll let,
I'll let our students think about that a little
bit because I wanna make sure Angela has the time
to share her, her um trajectory to where she is today.
And um then we'll really open it up for questions because oftentimes our questions,
um both of our speakers have a chance to, to share.
So Angela, why don't you go ahead and,
and share a little bit about your experience to get where you are today?
Sure. Um I am, I'm Angela.
I'm currently 1/4 year graduate student
in the psychology department at Rutgers University
and specifically, I'm in the Behavioral and Systems Neuroscience area.
Um So behavioral Neuroscience just means that I am
very interested in what the brain is doing.
But I'm also interested in interpreting behavior
to see what's happening in the brain
and interpreting what's happening in the brain
to see why the behavior is happening.
Um
I graduated from
Ketchum in 2013. So it's been a while now. Um
And I was one of those students who was just good at everything,
which really sounds like a humble brag.
Um And it's, it's not a bad thing, but when it came time to say, what do I want to do?
What I want to be? When I grew up in college,
I had no idea. I had no idea what I wanted to do.
People would be like, well, what are you good at in school?
And the answer is, well, there's nothing that really stands out.
Everything is, I'm just sort of,
I could do it all really.
So
I ended up, I didn't end up, I chose Binghamton University um for a couple of reasons.
It's a really great university, a great education. It's a suny.
So you save your money a little bit that way.
Um And it's also a pretty big university.
So I'm at Rutgers right now which has like 50,000 undergrads, which is huge.
Binghamton had like 16,000.
So it was big but not like out of this world. Huge. Um And I wanted a bigger university.
So that,
because I was undecided if I wanted to be a journalist one day next semester,
I wanted to be a pharmacist.
I didn't have to leave my college. I didn't have to transfer universities.
I could really stay where I was. Um,
and so I knew what I didn't like. I didn't like math.
I wasn't really a huge fan of history and I knew I'm, I'm very much a people person.
I like being with people and working with people,
but I didn't want to work with people in any kind of medical or clinical capacity.
Um I just felt like
it could be
kind of draining. I know it can be very rewarding to work with people.
But I just felt like for me that wasn't gonna be what I wanted.
Um But I did like science and everything.
So I went in and I was like, maybe psychology because I really like criminal minds.
I watched that a lot in high school
and I actually applied to forensic psychology programs.
I really considered it.
So that's why I was kind of thinking psychology.
My first semester I took an intro psych course
and I didn't love it because
a lot of psychology, well, there's like cognition, there's social psychology,
there's developmental psychology
and those weren't really areas that interests me.
And then we started talking about like neuroscience and behavioral neuroscience.
Um And like what the brain is doing on like a chemical, molecular sort of matter.
And that's what I really liked.
And I found out through a friend that Binghamton
had an integrated neuroscience program and I was like,
that sounds really interesting.
And so if I had never run into that friend,
I don't know if I would have ever ended up doing neuroscience,
but everything sort of fell in place with me.
And by the end of my freshman year
I had declared as an integrative neuroscience major.
My sophomore year, I took a drugs and behavior course
and I really, really liked that.
Um I thought it was really interesting how you can
add something to a system and see it change.
So you're adding any kind of drug to the body, it affects the central nervous system,
it affects your behavior, things like that.
And that was my sophomore year.
And around that time, I had a lot of friends who were, um,
they were joining research labs and I was like, maybe I should be doing that too.
So I joined a research lab as an undergraduate research assistant
working in an alcohol lab.
We were working with road models of chronic alcohol exposure to see the,
to study the neurobiology of learning and memory.
And I was actually really nervous to work with
animals at first because I love animals so much.
My cat's my best friend
and I know animal research is really important,
but I wasn't sure I would feel doing it
um, but the animals are held to the highest standards. They are treated so well.
They get vet visits every day. They, there's really,
it's hard, but
it makes sense and it, it was ok for me.
So that was like my first experience working with animals. Um, and I really liked it.
I really like that. I could do something experimental to an animal.
Follow it through. I can see its behavior.
Unfortunately, you do have to kill the animal to collect its brain.
But then I can look at the brain cells and see the impact of the behavioral paradigm,
the animal went through or that alcohol treatment that the animal had.
And so I really like that
and it wasn't until the end of my junior year of college that I was like,
maybe I should go to grad school because I started thinking,
ok, I have one more year of college left.
What am I gonna do with a Bachelor's degree in integrative Neuroscience.
Um,
and one of the reasons I didn't want to do psychology because in my head as a freshman,
I was like, if you get a psych degree, you're a counselor or a therapist or something.
And I didn't want to go to all that school. I didn't want to be in school till I was 30.
Um, as it turns out, I'll be in school until I'm 27.
Um, but
I really like this path, my undergrad research experience really
I feel like it kind of like fell in my lap happened,
but that's what set me on the path that I'm on now.
And so
I,
like I said, I majored in integrative neuroscience,
which was essentially an entire psychology degree as well as chemistry.
Um, I had to take physics, which was horrible. Physics is really hard.
Like I said, I don't like math.
Um,
some upper level level bio courses and some math courses with nothing too advanced.
a lot of people actually used that degree at Binghamton for like a pre health track.
So I took a lot of like classes that a lot of like med students would have taken.
But I tailored it more to be more on like the psychology side.
And so the psychology classes came easy to me,
it was something I was very interested in.
Um,
so I did get a good amount of A's in college,
but I also got some B's and C's in some of my harder classes.
I ended up graduating with a 34, which it's not bad but, you know,
like it's not excellent.
I didn't get to graduate with honors or anything.
Um And I say that because for grad school,
I had like this preconceived notion that like the best of the best
students go on to grad school to go on and get these,
like, you know, their MD, their phd.
Um And so
I really sort of doubted myself as an applicant because I
was comparing myself to other people and things like that.
But I had good, I had really good grades in my psychology classes.
And then I had mostly these, these pluses in my others.
And I was applying to psychology programs for grad school.
Um, grad school,
there's so much involved in grad school and depending on what
you want to do or where you want to go.
Um, I really like neuroscience, but like I said, I like behavioral neuroscience,
which is typically held in psychology departments.
So I focused my grad school search for psychology departments
with areas of research that interested me
because in psychology departments, you get accepted to a faculty members lab
and if you don't
match up with a faculty member, you don't really get accepted to the program.
There's other programs that sort of rotate, there's a lot that goes into it,
but I knew exactly what I wanted to research or I thought I did, I really,
really like drugs.
I think drugs are really cool, studying them.
Um
So I wanted to do drugs and I wanted to do addiction research.
Um and that's how I ended up at Rutgers. Um
And there's a lot more information on the powerpoint about how I ended up there.
So you can always check and read that.
Um But
the phd program is typically a five year program
and what's really great about getting a phd in psychology or biology,
neuroscience, chemistry,
things like that is that you get paid to be a graduate student.
So I signed up for five more years of college, but I also signed a contract.
So I'm getting paid for these five years and I'm not paying my tuition,
I never see a bill for my tuition.
So I'm getting a phd for free and they're paying me and
they're paying me because I'm doing really important work for the university.
I'm doing really important research and I also teach
classes as part of that stipend that I earn.
So I teach classes in the undergraduate psychology department at Rutgers,
which is really great experience because I was 22
when I graduated college. So I was teaching
other 22 year olds at 22. I'm 25 now. So I'm like teaching my peers basically.
Um And teaching is something that I'm comfortable in.
It's an experience that I think I'm good at,
but it's not necessarily what I really want.
I really like being in the lab. I really like my research.
I think it's very rewarding. I'm seeing my education pay off every day.
Um And grad school is really great because obviously I like learning
if I was gonna sign up for five more years of school
and in high school, they want you to be a really well rounded student
in college, you have to take gen EDS. So you're a well rounded student.
But grad school is where you pick what you want to study, what you're interested in.
And so, like I said, I'm really interested in drugs and behavior.
Um,
if you were interested in another facet of
psychology or neuroscience or any other topic,
you study what you want to study.
And so I'm currently researching the effects of chronic opioid abuse on how
your immune system functions and how your
immune system communicates with your brain.
And I think it's really super cool. Um But there's so many other things you can do.
I know, not everyone loves playing with brains,
but I get to go and I get to slice brains and I stain brains and I
look at the cells and I see the impact of the treatment that I did on them.
Um And I really love my research.
So I think if,
if you can take any sort of opportunity,
if you kind of like science and things like that, any opportunity
to get you, I don't know any kind of experience in college or anything like that,
that would be my advice.
But also other advice,
even if you don't wanna go on like necessarily a research route,
but you want to do like the health care sort of field
um would be to not underestimate yourself as a student or an applicant.
I compared myself to everyone.
I compared my grades, I compared my experiences, you know,
my extracurricular activities because I felt like
I wasn't a perfect applicant and honestly,
that did hold me back from applying to maybe programs or schools that I wanted to.
Um because I just couldn't get myself to do it and I missed the deadline.
Um,
but looking back,
I had my own unique experience
and everyone has a unique experience and it was,
it's like comparing apples and oranges.
Um, so don't let your grades get you down. Like
I had a couple C's
um Doctor Coulson
had ad, you know,
um you can bounce back from it and it's not sort of like the end of the world.
Um
So I guess that was my trajectory a day in my life.
It really kind of depends as a grad student.
My first two years, I was taking classes while working in the lab.
Now I am done taking classes. I never have to take class again, which is wonderful.
Um And it really kind of depends on where my
experiment is because I am in charge of project management.
I do personnel management. I do finance management.
I really run my lab and I'm in charge of making sure everything gets done.
So right now, I am currently staining brain tissue.
I had rats um self administer fentaNYL, a really, really strong opioid,
they self administered fentaNYL.
And then I am looking at certain immune cells in
the brain to see how they responded to that treatment.
So I spend my days staining cells,
I'll be imaging cells. I'll be counting cells.
I'm also working on publishing some of my data, so I'll be a published author soon.
So I'm writing up papers. Um
I enjoy writing. So writing, I mean, it's a very tedious task, but I like it in the end.
Writing is something I'm good at, so
I enjoy doing that.
Um
So my,
my day to day it,
it's very casual, it's very casual in the lab.
Um
And in terms of a work life balance
with grad school, unfortunately,
it's kind of expected that you spend all your time in the lab,
you spend a lot of time doing your schoolwork, doing your research.
That's not to say that you can't accomplish a healthy work life balance.
That's something that I really pride myself on.
I just like,
feel deep in my bones that I will not like give
my life up for my work for my education or anything.
I think there has to be a place for a healthy work life balance.
So I fully feel like I do achieve it.
I do have really early mornings and really late nights sometimes.
Um, but
I make sure that I have most of my weekends, I make sure that after dinner
I have my free time
because it's not like I'm studying for exams anymore.
I feel this really feels like a job like I am a neuroscientist.
And so I want to treat it like a job because I've been in school since I was five.
I'm 25 now.
So it's been 20 years and I'm getting a little tired of feeling like a student.
So I'm trying to do things that make me feel like an
adult because I am an adult even though I'm still a student.
Um, so it's sort of like a weird transition.
Um But yeah, I hope that answered
the task there.
You definitely did a great job and there is tons of
information on the slide so students can go back to that.
So, do you want to open it up to our students?
Um to see if anyone would like to turn their camera on to ask a question
or um if you'd like to come off uh mute or put something in the chat,
um
I'll give everyone a second or two.
OK. OK. Good.
So,
um Rebecca is asking what exactly is
the difference between psychology and psychiatry?
So, Doctor Alex, do you want to take that one?
Um
So in practice,
there's
significant differences, although there's also a lot of overlap
in terms of the training, there's there, there's a dramatic difference. Um
So clinical psychology
um tends to require graduate school in psychology.
Whereas psychiatry requires medical school
in practice, clinical psychologists, if they're working with patients,
for example,
will do therapy
and psychiatrists can do therapy, but they're also able to prescribe medication.
So
I would say psychiatry is probably more biologically based,
more focused on disease and
biologically based or medication based treatments.
Um And the training pathway is very different. Um
But yet they both deal very clearly with the same organ which is the brain of the mind.
And um
and there's a lot of overlap in terms of the
patients that we see, there's a lot of collaboration between the,
between the two fields.
So
I I work closely with lots of psychologists,
people, people tend to boil it down to something very basic, which is that
psychiatrists prescribe medicine, psychologists do therapy.
Right.
Um Definitely the training is, is, is different. Um
because you have to understand the medical implications,
other questions
and
give everyone a chance to think through
um
-- questions. Maya, you wanna ask a question, you
-- can come off.
Um I don't necessarily have a question.
Um This is my first time joining you guys as zoom because every time I always end up
being at work so early and I never get a chance to join. And I just wanna say that
I appreciate the transparency because right now I think because of,
you know,
everything that's going on last year and this year that I haven't done the best
academically and I would like to go to med school and because of my grades,
it's made me like really nervous about what I wanna do in the future
and you know, hearing other people that
get bad grades and they compare themselves to others and you know, stuff like that.
It just
makes you feel like, ok, this is, this is a normal feeling and, you know,
I'll get through it and it's not the end of the world.
So I really do appreciate you guys telling your stories and you know,
your tasks in everyday life and stuff like that.
Well, thank you, maya. Yeah, de de determination. Go ahead, doctor.
No, I mean, I, I Yeah, II, I appreciate the comment. I don't know.
What, what year are you right now?
I'm a junior
in high school. Yes. Yeah.
So
it's not too late.
Believe me.
I think the, you know, the barrier to entry for medical school is very, very high.
So I, I don't mean to sugar coat it. Obviously grades need to be very, very high.
Um, at some point. But what, where your grades are now, I can say with confidence are
entirely irrelevant to whether you can make it to medical school or not.
I, I mean,
II I appreciated Angela's point about not wanting school to take over your life.
I would say with medicine,
it does at least for a brief period of time, take over your life. It is everything
because you wanna kind of get yourself into the school.
Um,
the hardest time in my life was the year
that I was applying to medical school for sure.
Or I didn't know what I get in when I knock it in.
I was so preoccupied with my grades and looking back and all the regrets and
I should have gotten this
A plus instead of a B or an A minus. And I thought everything hinged.
Then there's a great joke that, um, once you get into medical school,
do you know what they call the person that graduates last in their class
doctor?
So once you get in, you just have to pass your glasses and get through it.
-- Excellent
-- advice,
other questions.
Um I'll open up to our panel too as I
uh kind of go through some of our previous questions.
Um
If anyone wants to come off,
I can ask a question.
I did,
I would like to ask um Doctor Alex about the research you're doing as psychiatrist.
-- Can. Can you share
-- a little? Yeah, of course.
So when I started practicing as a psychiatrist,
I found myself frustrated at our inability to really predict
who might respond to certain kinds of treatments, right?
We have lots of treatments for anxiety and depression and
various other symptoms, but
we don't do a very good job of being able to predict
who might respond to a certain treatment over another treatment.
And so I got interested in the idea of predicting treatment response and,
and using things like genetics
or biomarkers, you know,
kind of biological markers in the blood or using um techniques that measure
electrical activity in the brain, like using EEG
and I thought, wow, you know,
it's wonderful to be able to treat patients and affect
families on kind of a case by case basis.
But when you do research,
you can theoretically kind of move the whole field forward and you can,
you can kind of, you know, drive major change.
And so I got interested in clinical trials where we
use things like genetics and we select
populations of patients based on underlying genetic changes,
whether it's a specific genetic mutation in the gene that causes autism.
Um
And we try to understand
the changes in the brain on the basis of what we know about the genetic changes.
And then we think about ways to compensate for
those changes in the brain using specific medicines.
And then we study them in the context of a clinical trial.
We will,
we will take patients with a specific genetic mutation
and we will enroll them either in a placebo
group or a medication group and then we will follow them over time
and we will look at improvement in, in, in clinical outcomes.
Um And the, the goal is to develop new treatments.
Mostly my, my research is mostly focused on autism.
So the goal is to develop new treatments
in autism,
I think to the nice parallel between like
um the bridging between the work that Angela does even though
um maybe the study on o
opioids isn't the same but
that it has to come from the animal point to come
to you because your trials are on humans where her trials,
you,
you take the studies that develop through the
research that comes from those animal trials.
Um I don't know if either one of you wanna expand on that, how
they feed into one another,
-- the importance of
-- both.
Um Yeah, of course.
Um Ultimately,
I feel like everything that we do in research
is to improve some kind of human experience.
Um And so I study drug addiction and although I'm interested in sort of like neuro
immunomodulation,
um I'm well versed in a lot of different aspects of it.
Um
And so I do read human clinical trials sort of to see, get more background,
get more information,
but just, um I mean, I'm not the most well versed in clinical trials,
but I do know that a lot of things, a lot of drug trials,
it has to start in an animal model first because
you can't just recruit people off the street and said,
hey, I have this new pill, I'd love to see how it works.
Would you like to try it?
Um It's, that's very unethical. So the ethical route is to start in an animal model.
And so if I can see, for instance, um
my research is based on the fact that
um a lot of chronic opioid users,
whether it's addiction or if it's like a chronic opioid
treatment with your doctor or something for chronic pain,
there is some kind of degree of suppression of immune system activity.
So that means that you are more susceptible
to infection or illness than a healthy individual.
And so, with my animal model,
I'm looking to see what is the degree of this suppression for chronic opioid abuse.
And does this recover after a certain period of abstinence?
And this, of course, I'm sure you can imagine has a ton of implications,
but if I can identify what exactly is being suppressed, how it is being suppressed.
Um and maybe speculate on what this could mean,
this could be used potentially in um rehabilitation facilities or
sort of trials that are looking to help
um drug addicts recover.
Um Maybe one day very, very far in the future, we can cure addiction
and it will take a lot of, you know, collaboration from a lot of different groups.
But so my research, although it is in animals,
the findings could have very significant implications for human trials.
And so we're not completely, I'm not completely removed from human trials,
although I probably won't ever
my my specific research,
I would not bring that to human clinical trials because that's like very,
very far away.
But I would pass it on to someone like Doctor
Alex if he was researching something that I was,
and it's something that we could
collaborate about and I can tell him hinge findings and then someone who is more
well versed with humans can see how do we adapt that to a human trial?
Mhm.
Are there any other questions or anything that anyone would like to add?
Very quiet today
and try
Doctor Alex?
Are there any skills that, um, you could share with our students that you feel um,
would be beneficial for them?
So soft, the soft skills that, um,
you can learn in a textbook or in a college classroom?
But
if it's something that they could work on and then also,
I always want to ask if there's internship
opportunities or shadowing opportunities for our students,
if they wanted to learn more about this field.
Sure.
I think um
I mean, as a physician, somebody who works with people,
I think probably the most important skill is a communication skill, the ability to
express things in language that can be easily understood.
I think that skill also translates to being a good teacher.
So if you can
take complicated ideas and explain them to people, so they understand
that's extremely valuable.
Um So communication skills and then
kind of equally important is, is communication skills through writing.
And I know we all spend a lot of time doing emails. Um But I think that
you're writing, whether it's, you know,
papers that Angela is working on or even just a simple email,
that's a reflection of you. It's a reflection of how you think.
And I think it's worth being very, very thoughtful about
how you want to express yourself um with language and writing.
Um and I, I definitely found that
the ability of someone to kind of progress in their career
after they've all kind of met a certain level of um competency
in, you know, educational skills or, you know, learning
has a lot to do with how well they communicate with others.
Um
Yeah.
Yeah. The second part of the question that I forgot already.
-- That's OK. Um Internships.
-- Uh Yes. Yeah. Yeah, of course, of course. Yeah. So
post COVID, talk to me. So, yeah, I think um we always host students
for shadowing for, for research internships. Um
Even high school,
they don't have to be in
college.
-- Yeah,
-- they don't have to be in college. They had to be over 16.
Um There's obviously a pretty significant limitations in terms of what they can do,
but there's still learning opportunities that are meaningful
right now.
It's very challenging because there's limitations being placed based on COVID.
So we're only allowed to have
a certain number of people on site. And
I, I would say
it's also too late frankly, but I think for people that are interested, you know,
get in touch with potential mentors in, you know,
November, December, February. Do it, do it early act early
blanket the universe.
Use any connection you possibly have.
It's very challenging to find mentors that are willing to host students but
don't, don't give up. And every time somebody says no to you say
I appreciate you writing back to me.
Do you have anybody else who might suggest just keep, keep,
keep pummeling away at it?
It's very, very
unfortunate how, how challenging it is but, you know, just keep, keep at it.
Excellent, excellent advice.
And, um, Lorraine just before we, we let everyone go back to their,
their work days because we do know now how busy they are.
Um, did you want to share a little bit, um, about the,
the Dutchess community connection with the Science Lax program?
Sure.
Um Well, you know, and I'm also this time around because of the other track,
going to mention our human services um
psychology track program for associates. So if you're not exactly sure
where you wanna go, our liberal arts and science program would be the, the pre
med track. But we also do have psychology and if you're really on sure,
we have liberal arts and you can experience all
of these different classes and take some sciences and,
and take some psychology and,
and see where you go because as we, as we've heard from our speakers today
and speakers in the past, sometimes we,
we pivot and we change and I love doctor Alex that you said,
don't predetermine your future on very small experiences.
We often talk ourselves out of a lot that we're capable of.
And I really like that. Both of you emphasized uh
just working for it, just keep going and keep trying and,
and, and putting your effort in and when you do figure it out,
you will succeed.
I'll ask to answer any questions before we let everyone get back to their busy days.
I heard a great, um,
I heard a great
talk.
I'm, I'm sure it's been passed around and I'm,
and I'm like the last person to mention it, but
it was a, it was an interview and I forgot with whom.
But, you know, the question was asked, you know,
what's the best advice that you give young people?
Right? And
I think the person that was, that responded said, you know,
the the standard advice is to find something you're passionate about, right?
And I think that's,
that's very difficult advice and very kind of misleading
because who knows what you're actually passionate about.
So the advice is instead find something you're good at
that you actually feel that you're good at
because if you're good at something you'll inevitably succeed in it.
And if you succeed in it, everything else comes with that you'll get passionate,
you'll have lots of opportunities,
you'll be successful financially and all those kinds of things kind of come with
excellent,
excellent advice and for today. So I just would like to thank all of our speakers.
Um and I'd like to thank you for taking the time to put together all that information.
And Doctor Alex,
thank you for taking the time to spend with us today and share your experiences.
And um we will have this recording posted on our website so that if you wanna refer,
refer it to any of your, your friends, they can watch it as well.
And I will um I'm also a resource for you if you ever want to get in
touch with either of our speakers today um
or make connections for future internships or shadowing.
Um To let me know, I wanna thank um Mary Jane and Lorraine
and Louise for your help as well.
And with that, I um just a reminder that we have one session left in June.
I have been emailing you to ask for
um any, any specific questions you have. But I think we're gonna be focusing on
uh wrap up with the educational component on college and career readiness.
So be looking for additional emails on that.
-- But um Doctor
-- Watkins, can I just um share just real quick. I wanna make sure that
the um students realize that there's uh everything
Angela said is in writing here too.
So she gives you what her day is.
Um her, her research focus, what she'll do with her degree, why she picked the field,
um why she take the phd program over anything else? What courses
um what the process was? Um how did, how did she get in?
I know that's a big question for people. And did she need letters of recommendation?
So I just wanna make sure that, you know,
because we don't always have quite this much information,
but Angela was able to provide us with a lot of information
and then here's the people asked about the grades
and what scores do you need on standardized test?
And do does she pay tuition? So that was all
-- nicely done by Angela. So I wanted to thank
-- her for that.
Yes, she did
very, very, very well rounded in those responses. So thank you.
And that will that one is already posted on the website
that he will be there in the next day or two.
You can go under students on our website Maya Maya
and then underneath students on the left hand side,
it'll say Career Zoom Series
and you'll still see every um every link that we had since November.
So
um and if and if you have any other for future, uh further questions,
you can always email me at Amy dot Watkins
at W CS dny.org.
Well, thank you so much. Uh Thank you again to Angela and Doctor Alex.
You've been amazing
and thank you to our students, Rebecca.
I think you get the award for being the most loyal participant.
So, I it wouldn't be the same without you here.
So I really hope you decide to go into a field of health sciences after all of this.
So um thank you again. Have a wonderful day. Everyone. Enjoy some vitamin D outside.